---
title: "Lego Bricks Onboarding Analysis"
date: "2020-03-13"
status: "draft"
---
I have had the opportunity to observe my kid's first experiences with Duplos, the Lego bricks targeted for toddlers. The sets have not come packed with instructions, leaving me and my kid copy the image from the box. My kid, however, does not care about what's on the box and prefers to just connecting them together randomly. Even without building goals, I've seen the fine motor skills and understanding of the lego rules grow. These skills learned early will help  building with Lego bricks at later age. I have witnessed older kids and adults alike having cumbersome first experiences with Legos, however, with attention to onboarding, Lego Group has managed to ensure that anyone can enjoy Legos right out of the box.

Onboarding is a process of ensuring that the user is able to enjoy a service as intended. This is not common with toys and when there is one, it is usually limited to a manual. However, with live services like mobile games, onboarding is crucial for retaining users past day one. Lego bricks system[^1] operates similar to live games: they have regular content and feature updates in form of new bricks and sets, content needs to cater to builders (users) with ever increasing skills and changing tastes, and most importantly they need to ensure that new builders do not churn before finishing their first sets. The last problem is further exacerbated by the fact that anyone can start right away with the most difficult set.

As an experienced Lego builder, I had to break my own bias to the difficulty of Legos. Especially for someone who has not been introduced to activities that train spatial skills[^2], it could take some time to get used to building with Legos, even when following the instructions. The builder must train their fine motor and spatial skills in order to be able to manipulate the bricks. These are attributes that if not trained young, they can be lost or very hard to acquire later in life[^3].

Lego bricks onboarding is split in two phases. The Duplo phase serves as the age appropriate entry point for builders aged between one and five. Duplos take the IDEO toddler toothbrush approach[^5] by giving them big bricks that do not require trained fine motor skills ... or cannot fit in the mouth. The Duplo sets do not come with instructions either as the young builders are expected to just play and be creative[^6]. The lack of sets targeted for ages three and up sets up a transition period for Lego bricks which happen to have the minimum age of 4. The Duplo phase is important for making the Lego bricks phase easier to digest so the transition group already gets licensed sets like Frozen Ice Castle (10899) as a last effort to get new builders young.

After the transition, the builders acquire a set of smaller Lego bricks. Luckily, these are mostly compatible with the Duplo collection keeping the investment[^7] still intact. The Duplo rules are inherited by Lego bricks but they also introduce new interesting pieces. In case the builder skipped the first phase, there is an instruction manual introducing all pieces and help you out with the Lego rules. As the sets' age group goes higher, so will the intricacy to match the expected skill level of the builder.

Lego bricks system can be entered through any set and they all need to be available with as low barrier as possible, even the Lego Colosseum (10276). Live operated games may experience this challenge especially when there is a reliance on new content. New content may trigger old users to come back after a long break and the new rules need to be introduced and the old recalled. New users may also be interested in the new content, but are blocked until they have granted access (usually by progressing in the game). Lego relies on intrinsic motivation and rewards to engage the users though their first steps ensuring an enjoyable experience.

The success of Legos can be contributed to the intrinsic motivational drivers: autonomy and competency[^*]. Creativity is established early with Duplos and is seen as the lack of instructions. The builder is encouraged to learn how to build and play with the bricks by imitating the image on the box or by parents' example. The approach is comparable to video games' that do not rely on explicit tutorials. Take for example the classic Super Mario games[^8]. The player is suggested a goal to the right without explicit instructions to do so. They are encouraged to explore the rules on their own and then use what they have learned to reach the goal.

As Lego sets target age group increases and the sets become more intricate, skill is acquired. The instruction booklets help build the sets but with skill and creativity, you can build anything you want. But just in case a returning user is a little rusty, the booklet will come in handy. In games, the booklet is comparable to a tutorial. Live games that introduce new features to the game often have a separate tutorial to introduce the feature, however, for returning users this is not enough as they may have forgotten some of the core rules. League of Legends rewrites the rules after each season[^9]. The playable characters may stay the same but remembering the details of the arena when you return may not be needed as they have changed.

For late comers, the instructions serve an additional two purposes: to quickly teach the rules of Lego, and serve as a feedback system to to give a sense of accomplishment and to no overwhelm the builder. Especially for the more intricate sets, the instructions are sectioned into smaller modules giving a set of smaller goals that combined produce the set[^10]. Completing each module gives a small motivational boost as well as improve the comprehension of the Lego rule set as each step shows how particular piece works. Of course the skills will not be acquired right away, but the instructions will help the new builder to get to the finish line.

In live video games where new content is introduced regularly and it may not be possible to set available from the get go. User is expected to have learned certain fundamentals before accessing the new content. The common way is to gate the content behind another, or in Lego terms, keep the cool Lego set locked up until some other ones have been built. This introduces a problem where the player has to spend time on other content before they get what they came for. This could mitigated by teasing the content like in Sim City: BuildIt where the clan versus mode can be seen before it is unlocked. In Diablo series, a high level friend can "boost" another through the content so they can unlock the end game features. In the end, the player may get bored before unlocking the desired feature or does not have friends that can coach them.

Lego strategy is designed to capture returning customers at an early age[^11]. However, kids are not the only target audience and this has been kept in mind when designing the first experience for any age. When a toddler starts building, they do not need instructions as they are more interested in individual pieces and exploring what they can do. Younger kids may want build the set and will pick up the instructions to do so. When the sets get more intricate, the instructions lets new builders have small wins building up to a big win. Finally the age gate is an additional measure that indicates the expected basic skills from the builder helping a first timer ensure that their first experience is the best it can be.

[^1]: Note that I am excluding Lego Group's other products like their digital games and software as well as clothing and accessories line up.
    Lego bricks system would be Duplo, Lego and Technic.
[^2]: Research on Spatial Skills and Block Building In Girls and Boys
[^3]:
    TODO: Insert source for loss of spatial skills through age
[^5]: Tom Kelley, IDEO: <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tvkivmyKgEA&ab_channel=Entrepreneurship.org>
[^6]: The big Duplo sets come with instructions for adults in case the set was purchased for the end result. Take for example  Modular Playhouse 10929.
[^7]: Investment is an important part of the Hooked -model, a framework for retaining users. When user has something invested in the service, they are more likely to keep using it.
    Hooked: How to Build Habit-Forming Products
    Nir Eyal
[^*]: Self-determination theory
[^8]:
    TODO: Link to Anna Anthropy's article on Mario level design
[^9]: League of Legends has a ranked ladder system (a type of leader board) which is reset once a year. The time between the resets is called a season.
[^10]:
    TODO: Link to an article about partitioning a big goal into smaller goals.
[^11]: Max Bogomoloff, Children’s playing experiences –   Lego’s role in children’s everyday life, 2018
